# abeta_evolution

## Dataset preparation

To identify proteins containing amyloid beta peptide, we searched for similar proteins using BLAST in UniprotKB and NCBI non-redundant databases with human abeta1-42. Subsequently, we identified proteins with an analysed fragment containing histidines. We retrieved the proteins by BLAST and we generated a multiple sequence alignment (MSA) using the MAFFT method. We localised fragments aligned to ABeta1-42 and filtered out proteins with ABeta6-14 regions shorter than 5 amino acids.
In Actinopterygii, ABeta is encoded by two genes, appa and appb, whereas other organisms have only one gene encoding ABeta. Therefore, to perform the analysis, we identified one representative ABeta1-42 sequence produced by genes and excluded isoforms. To find them, we proceeded as follows. We divided the proteins per organism and for each of them we made an MSA with the human sequence. For each organism, we identified the ABeta1-42 localisations in the MSA and grouped the same peptides. For each gene, we selected the peptides that were most similar to the human sequence, based on the Levensthein distance. 
For Actinopterygii, we assigned genes appa or appb that encode proteins to each group of the same peptides ABeta1-42. To find the genes, we used the NCBI, Ensembl and UniprotKB databases. We then executed CD-HIT to group peptides that did not have assigned genes. We assigned genes to peptides that clustered with peptides with known genes. For instance, a peptide similar to the product of appa was automatically included in the appa cluster. After thorough examination of parameter combinations, we have selected a restrictive similarity procedure (similarity: 90%, 95% and 97%). Finally, we selected organisms that had assigned proteins expressed both genes. If there was more than one peptide variant per organism and gene, we selected only the most similar one to human ABeta1-42.

We calculated the number of unique proteins containing histidines in MSA at positions 6, 13, and 14 for each animal group (see Table 1 in publication). Additionally, we enumerated the specific mutations at these positions within each group (see Table S1 in publication). Furthermore, we generated phylogenetic trees and WebLogos to visualize the most significant findings.


## Tree and logo preparation

We performed analyses on the final dataset. A phylogenetic tree was constructed using the ETE3 Python package, based on the ncbi taxonomy(see Figure 1  in publication. The tree leaves represented animal groups (fish, amphibians, mammals, reptiles, and birds) and contained counts of ABeta1-42 peptides with histidine positions at residues 6, 13, and 14. For the group of fish known as Actinopterygii, there are counts for the appa gene, orthologous to the human app gene. The presence of two leaves with bony and cartilaginous fishes in the group of fishes indicates significant differences in the sequence peptides. Additionally, the MSA was generated with MAFFT, and the most diverse fragments (residues 1-16) were visualised with WebLogos for each animal group. WebLogo representations were also provided for the appb gene of Actinopterygii and the 17-42 peptide fragments were presented for each animal group (see Table S2). Furthermore, the histidine positions in the peptides from each organism were enumerated and their detailed composition was analysed (see Table S1).

Reference publication with result tables and figures: 
